Explore consensus cell types in brain and CNS tumors (#1036)
AlexsLemonade/OpenScPCA-analysis: analyses/cell-type-consensus/exploratory-notebooks/04-brain-and-cns-consensus-celltypes.Rmd

```

Below we show the same data but faceted by project. 

```{r}
stacked_barchart(all_results_df, fill_column = "top_celltypes", facet_variable = "project_id", celltype_colors = all_celltype_colors)
```

- Macrophages seem to be the dominant cell type across most samples. 
- There appear to be some samples that have a higher proportion of T cells, but this is not project specific. 
- As with the osteosarcoma samples there is some general heterogeneity both in the number of assigned cells and the cell types across all samples. 

We hypothesize that there will be differences in the cell types observed based on the specific type of brain or CNS tumor. 
Let's look at what tumor types are represented here and then use that to assign diagnosis groups so we can separate samples by diagnosis in the later plots. 

```{r}
all_results_df |>
  dplyr::select(library_id, diagnosis) |> 
  unique() |> 
  dplyr::count(diagnosis, name = "number_of_samples") |>
  dplyr::arrange(desc(number_of_samples))
```

Based on this let's make the following groups: 

- Low-grade glioma: Any samples labeled with "Low-grade glioma" or are part of `SCPCP000002` which are categorized as LGG tumors. 

> - High-grade glioma: Any samples labeled with "High-grade glioma" or are part of `SCPCP000001` which are categorized as HGG tumors. 

Reviewer: This should [include Diffuse midline glioma](https://www.cancer.gov/rare-brain-spine-tumor/tumors/diffuse-midline-gliomas) as well ([another source](https://radiopaedia.org/articles/diffuse-midline-glioma-h3-k27-altered?lang=us)).

```

```{r}
stacked_barchart(immune_results_df, fill_column = "immune_category", facet_variable = "grouped_diagnosis", celltype_colors = three_color_scheme)
```

This isn't super interesting to me since most classified cells are immune cells and there doesn't seem to be any major differences across disease types outside of ATRT having a lower percentage of classified cells than other projects. 

## Macrophage vs. T cell populations 

It looks like there may be some differences between T cell and macrophage infiltrate based on the tumor type. 
Here we will look specifically at all T cells and anything in the macrophage/monocyte lineage. 
I'm including any cell types that are in our list of possible cell types and a child of [mononuclear phagocyte](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/cl/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FCL_0000113?lang=en) in the macro/mono group. 
We should also note that "macrophage" here probably refers to microglia instead. 

```{r}
# t cell subtypes
t_cells <- unique_celltypes |> 
  stringr::str_subset("T")

# macro/mono lineage 

> macro_mono_cells <- c(

Reviewer: You could probably call this myeloid and include granulocytes with little to no impact on the results?

  "macrophage", 
  "monocyte",
  "mononuclear phagocyte", 

>   "dendritic cell"

Reviewer: Could you only get a myeloid dendritic cell out of the consensus labels? <https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5032838/>

non_annotated_libs <- setdiff(unique(all_results_df$library_id), library_levels)
library_levels <- c(library_levels, non_annotated_libs)

immune_results_df <- all_results_df |> 
  dplyr::left_join(immune_pct_df, by = c("library_id")) |> 
  dplyr::mutate(
    percent_immune = dplyr::if_else(is.na(percent_immune), 0, percent_immune),
    library_id = forcats::fct_relevel(library_id, library_levels)
  )

stacked_barchart(immune_results_df, fill_column = "immune_category", celltype_colors = three_color_scheme)
```
Let's see how the percentage of immune cells compares across projects and diagnosis. 

```{r}
stacked_barchart(immune_results_df, fill_column = "immune_category", facet_variable = "project_id", celltype_colors = three_color_scheme)
```

```{r}
stacked_barchart(immune_results_df, fill_column = "immune_category", facet_variable = "grouped_diagnosis", celltype_colors = three_color_scheme)
```

This isn't super interesting to me since most classified cells are immune cells and there doesn't seem to be any major differences across disease types outside of ATRT having a lower percentage of classified cells than other projects. 

> ## Macrophage vs. T cell populations 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Myeloid vs. T cell populations 
```

It looks like there may be some differences between T cell and macrophage infiltrate based on the tumor type. 
Here we will look specifically at all T cells and anything in the macrophage/monocyte lineage. 
I'm including any cell types that are in our list of possible cell types and a child of [mononuclear phagocyte](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/cl/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FCL_0000113?lang=en) in the macro/mono group. 

> We should also note that "macrophage" here probably refers to microglia instead. 

Reviewer: This text could use a rewrite now.

  dplyr::mutate(
    immune_broad_category = dplyr::case_when(
      consensus_annotation %in% t_cells ~ "T cell", 
      consensus_annotation %in% myeloid_cells ~ "Myeloid",
      consensus_annotation == "Unknown" ~ "Unknown",
      .default = "All remaining cell types"
    )
  )

# define colors 
immune_category_colors <- c(
  "T cell" = all_celltype_colors[["T cell"]],
  "Myeloid" = all_celltype_colors[["macrophage"]],
  "All remaining cell types" = "grey60",
  "Unknown" = "grey90"
)
```

```{r}
stacked_barchart(immune_results_df, fill_column = "immune_broad_category", facet_variable = "grouped_diagnosis", celltype_colors = immune_category_colors) +
  theme(strip.text = element_text(size = 6)) 
```

- As expected based on the previous plot, glioblastoma appears to have greater T cell infiltrate than macrophages across all samples. 
- There appears to be a handful of samples in the "High-grade glioma" group that also have high T cell infiltrate. 
Notably, glioblastoma is a type of HGG. 
- Generally, the T cell population seems lowest in LGG. 
Ganglioglioma also has fewer samples with high percentage of T cell infiltrate and this is also a LGG. 

> - It looks like about 50% of the pilocytic astrocytomas have more T cell infiltrate than macrophages. 

Reviewer: Same comment about lightly rewriting this section.

Finally, let's group by either HGG or LGG. 

```{r}
# assign diagnosis groups to use for faceting plots 
hgg_lgg_df <- immune_results_df |> 
  dplyr::mutate(
    hgg_vs_lgg = dplyr::case_when(
      grouped_diagnosis %in% c("Low-grade glioma", "Pilocytic astrocytoma", "Ganglioglioma") ~ "Low-grade glioma", 
      grouped_diagnosis %in% c("High-grade glioma", "Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor", "Glioblastoma") ~ "High-grade glioma",
      grouped_diagnosis == "Non-cancerous" ~ "Non-cancerous",
      .default =  "other"
    ) 
  ) |> 
  dplyr::filter(
    hgg_vs_lgg %in% c("High-grade glioma", "Low-grade glioma")
  )
```

```{r}
stacked_barchart(hgg_lgg_df, fill_column = "immune_broad_category", facet_variable = "hgg_vs_lgg", celltype_colors = immune_category_colors)
```

> Consistent with the previous findings it looks like HGG tend to have higher T cell infiltrate while LGG tend to have higher macrophage infiltrate. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consistent with the previous findings it looks like HGG tend to have higher T cell infiltrate while LGG tend to have higher myeloid cell proportions. 
```

Would it be fair to characterize microglia as "infiltrate?"
